in this video we're going to continue looking at
the normal distribution but in this case we're
learning about quantiles so let's say we have a
random variable X which is normally distributed
with mean 10 and standard deviation 2 we can plot
the mean on the graph here let's say that we were
given this information the probability that X is
greater than some unknown value K is equal to 30%
or 0.3 we need to find the value of K to make this
clearer let's draw this on the graph so we know
that the probability that X is greater than K is
30% therefore the area that we should shade should
start from this top end because all of these top
values are definitely going to be greater than
K so what I do is I start shading from the top
side and when my area has reached approximately
30% I'll stop and label this area as 0.3 remember
that the whole area under the curve is 100% or one
therefore this value must be K we can see that
this represents the probability statement the
probability or the area above K is 30% so we can
see this is quite similar to the previous normal
distribution questions we were doing except in
this case we are given the area and we need to
find the value before we were given the value
and we needed to find the area we can do this
in our calculator remember that for all normal
distribution questions we're going to be in stat
mode and then distribution normal remember that we
use NCD when we are given the values and we need
to find the probability or the area and we use
inverse Norm normal when we are given the area
or the probability and we need to find the values
so in this case we're going to be using inverse
normal we first put in our mean which is 10 and
then our standard deviation which is two the area
is this value right here or the probability
which we input as 0.3 then we need to set the
tail the tail is which way this thing here points
so you can see that it's pointing to the right so
we set tail on the right side obviously if it was
pointing to this side we would set tail left tail
Central is used when the area is symmetrically
concentrated around the mean so to make that clear
here's a diagram we have to have the mean here
and then this value here K be the same as this
value K and in that case we use a central tail
you can see that the area is in the middle but
really importantly it has to be symmetrical around
the mean for this to work so anyway in this case
we press tail right and then execute and this
gives us an x value of 11.05 therefore we know
that K is equal to 11.05 we can check this makes
sense using our diagram as we can see K is above
the mean which is 10 which fits with the value
of K which would be about here on a number line
let's try an example question exam marks are
normally distributed at this point I'll write
let x equal the exam marks we know that the mode
is 45 and standard deviation 20 so let's define
the distribution X is approximately normally
distributed now we don't know the mean but we
know the mode and for normal distributions the
mean and the mode are the same so the mean is 45
and the standard deviation is 20 5% of students
score above x marks we need to write this out
as a probability statement so the probability
that X is above Little X so greater than x is
5% so this probability is equal to 0.05 you can
see that in this case we are given a probability
and we need to find the value so let's now draw
the distribution the mean is 45 and we want the
probability that it is greater than a value to
be 5% so if we're using the greater than sign I'm
going to start shading from the top because these
values are going to be greater than and then when
I reach an area of about 5% of stop label that
as 0.05 and that value must be X now to calculate
this value we use inverse normal in our calculator
and putting these values into to our calculator
gives us X is approximately equal to 77.9 let's
do another one city to Bay Running times are
normally distributed let's define the variable let
x equal the city to Bay running time by the way if
you're struggling to know what to write here just
think what is normally distributed so whatever the
question says is normally distributed that's
what you put here we know the mean is 73 and
the standard deviation is 10 so let's define
the distribution X is approximately normally
distributed with mean 73 and standard deviation
10 will is faster than 98% of entrance in other
words his time is in the top 2% find the slowest
possible time he could run let's try writing this
out as a probability statement so we need to find
the time and therefore we don't know the value so
so we might initially be tempted to write the
probability that X is greater than an unknown
value K is equal to 0.02 but this actually doesn't
make sense because if Will's time is greater than
K it means that he's going to be running slower
than K right because if you take more time to run
you're running slower so actually in this case
it should be the probability that X is less than
K is equal to0 .02 let's draw this out we have
the probability that X is less than K is 02 so
therefore we start shading from the bottom until
we reach an area of about 2% label that 0.02 and
then that must be our value K hopefully looking
at this diagram makes a lot more sense we can see
that his time must be in the bottom 2% of times
for him to be faster than 98% of people by the
way we could have also done this by writing the
probability that X is greater than K is 0.98 that
would give us the same value in our calculator
we're going to use inverse normal because we
have the area and we're finding the value the
tail is on the left with an area of 02 then we
put the mean and standard deviation in and this
gives us a value of K is approximately equal to
52.6 so therefore will must Run in under 52.4
minutes let's try another question to do with
quants we know that the weight of Chip packets
is normally distributed with this mean and this
standard deviation so let's define the variable
let x equal weight of Chip packets we know that X
is normally distributed with mean 250 and standard
deviation 4 now the advertised weight is 250 and
if the actual weight is more than k grams of this
meaning k grams above or k grams below they are
discarded we know that 2% are discarded, find K so
let's try and put this together into a probability
statement to be discarded they have to be k g
off 250 so in other words the lower border would
be 250 - k and the upper border would be 250 +
k if we write this as a probability statement
we can see that this represents the probability
that X is within k g of 250 in other words it's
the probability that the chip packets are not
discarded so if the probability that they're
discarded is 2% the probability that they're not
discarded must be 0.98 or 98% let's try and sketch
this distribution our mean is 250 and then we've
got this probability statement which says that the
lower border Goes Down by K and the upper border
goes up by K so we can go k units up that way and
K units down that way and that represents our
borders so this would be 250 take K and then
this would be 250 plus K we know that the area
between these two values is 0.9 so I'm going
to shade that area and we know that this area
is 0.98 now because we are given a area and we
need to find the values we're going to be using
inverse normal so we go to inverse normal and
first put our mean of 250 and standard deviation 4
the area is 0.98 and we can see that this area is
symmetrical on either side of the mean so that's
when we can use a central tail note that if this
wasn't symmetrical in other words if there's more
area on one side than there is on the other we
wouldn't be able to use a central tail it has to
be the mean plus something and then the mean minus
the same thing we can see that inverse normal
gives us two values the lower one being this one
which is 240.69 and then the upper one being this
one which is is 259.31 so now to find K we just
take this one and we subtract 250 from it right
cuz we want to find this distance here so K is
equal 25931 - 250 which is 9.31 let's try another
question which is still looking at quantiles but
this one is a little bit more difficult we have x
a normally distributed variable with mean 104 and
standard deviation 12 we are also given this
probability statement and we need to find the
value of K so let's start just by rewriting the
probability statement we know that the probability
that X is between 110 and K is equal to 0.1 since
we are given the probability and we have to find
the value we know that we'll be using inverse
normal let's first sketch the distribution to
get a better idea of what's going on we know that
the mean is 104 and let's try and Mark this area
into the graph so we have the area between 110 and
K so let's just put 110 here somewhere above 104
and then we know that K must be above that so K
and I've tried to draw it so that the area between
them is approximately equal to .1 or 10% of the
total area so we know that this shaded area is
0.1 we know that we'll need to use inverse normal
because we're finding an unknown value however
with inverse normal we have to specify left tail
Central tail or right tail and this area doesn't
fit any of those three Tails so what we need to
do is add an area to this area to make it either
a left tail or a right tail I'll show you what I
mean if we add this green area here you can see
that the total combined area would now be a left
tail or if we add this yellow area here you can
see that the total combined area would be a right
tail looking at the graph we can see that this
green area is the area underneath 110 so therefore
or we can write the probability statement the
probability that X is less than 110 and that
would represent this area in the same way this
yellow area is the probability that X is greater
than K see because it's the area above K now using
NCD on our calculator we can find this green area
but it wouldn't be very easy for us to find this
yellow area because we don't know k so what we're
going to do is we're going to find this green area
and then add it to the red area and that will give
us a left tail which we can then use to find K so
using NCD on our calculator remember we're finding
this green area we put in our mean and standard
deviation and then the lower value is 9999 and
the upper value is 110 remember we're finding
this area this gives us an area of 0.691 46 so
now that we know that this area is equal to 0.69
and this area is equal to 0.1 we know the total
area underneath K is equal to these two things
added together so we can write the probability
that X is less than K is equal to 0.69146 + 0.1
which is 0.79146 and now we can see that we can
use inverse normal to find K because the area we
have has a left tail so opening inverse normal
we put our Tail as left the area is this total
area which is 0.79146 and then we already have the
mean and standard deviation from before this gives
us a value of K is equal to 113.7 okay so let me
just summarise this type of question if we have
an unknown value and the probability statement
gives us the probability between two values we
first sketch it and then what we need to do is add
the area on one of the sides to make it either a
left tail or a right tail and which area we add
will depend on which one is easier to find once
we've added those areas together we'll have a
left tail or a right tail and then we can just
use inverse normal to find the value let's try
another really similar question we have X which
is normally distributed and as I'm reading
the question I will write the distribution
so X is approximately normal with mean 34 and
standard deviation 6.2 the probability that X is
between these two values is 30% so so we write the
probability that X is between K and 33 is 30% or
0.3 we need to find the value of K so once again
let's start by first sketching the distribution we
know that the mean is 34 the probability statement
says that the area between K and 33 is about 3 so
let's put those values on 33 is less than 34 so
I'll put it here and then I want to place K below
33 cuz you can see it's down here such that the
area between them this area here is about 30% so
once again this shaded red area should be 0.3
now we can't use inverse normal yet because we
don't have a left tail or a right tail but I can
see that we can add this area here to make it a
right tail looking at the graph this area is the
probability that X is above 33 because it's the
area which is above 33 right so this probability
is P that X is greater than 33 again the reason
that I'm adding this area to make it a right tail
rather than adding this area to make it a left
tail is because I can't find this area because we
don't know what K is so we first need to calculate
the probability that X is greater than and 33 we
do this using NCD in our calculator so the lower
would be 33 the upper would be a really high
number and then the mean and standard deviation
we put them in here and this gives us an area or
a probability of 0.5641 so if we know this area
and we know this area we can add them together
to get the total area which is above K in other
words the probability that X is greater than K so
this is equal to the red Area 0.3 plus the green
area 0.5641 which is 0.8641 now we can use inverse
normal because we have a right tail where the area
is 0.864 and the mean and standard deviation
are already in there to get K is equal to
27.19 okay so that's the end of quantiles after
watching this value you should be able to do
these two things firstly we need to be able
to find a value in the normal distribution
when we're given the probability remember that
this was done using inverse normal secondly was
that more difficult type of question where
we're given a probability statement between
two values and we need to find one of those
values remember that we did that by finding
another area to either make it a left tail or
a right tail and then we can use inverse normal